		Changes made to LAB3D-SDL by jspenguin
		======================================


- Wall settings/Hi-Res Texture replacement

There is now a file called wallparams.ini which defines various
parameters for textures.

The format is similar to a regular INI file:

[wall number]
key=value
key=value

Parameters available:


src=<filename>

Use <filename> for the in-game texture instead of the texture from
walls.kzp. The image file can be any type supported by SDL_image;
however, PNG is recommended because of its features. The image
dimensions must be a power of 2, and must be smaller than the maximum
texture size of your OpenGL implementation. Multiple textures can use
the same image with the 'range' option. Only the in-game texture is
replaced. Anything that is drawn to the overlay (statusbar, menus,
etc.) will still use the old texture.


range=<left> <right>

Display only a portion of the texture. Only the horizontal range is
affected.


shadow=<wall number>

Use <wall number> as a shadow. The shadow will be drawn whenever the
current object is drawn. Only makes sense for sprites.


minfilt=<filter mode>
magfilt=<filter mode>

Override the default magnification or minimization filtering mode for
the texture. The value must be one of  GL_NEAREST, GL_LINEAR,
GL_NEAREST_MIPMAP_NEAREST, GL_NEAREST_MIPMAP_LINEAR,
GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_NEAREST, or GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR.


wrap=<wrap mode>

Override the default wrap mode of the texture. The value must be
either 'repeat' or 'clamp'.


bmpkind=<bmpkind>

Override the display type of the texture. Values are:

1: regular wall
2,3: face sprite
4: masked wall
5: floor sprite

This paramater is most often used to turn a face sprite into a floor
sprite (bmpkind=5). Floor sprites are unique to LAB3D-SDL, and are
drawn flat on the floor instead of vertically. Floor sprites are used
to draw shadows, holes, etc.

Note that when wallparams.ini is present, the standard texture
transitioning system is disabled.


- SDL2 support

LAB3D-SDL has been ported to SDL2.0, which brings several improvements:
1. Fullscreen mode now runs at the native desktop resolution - it's no
longer necessary to select your resolution in the setup program.
2. Game controller support - with SDL1.2, game controllers are
detected as joysticks, so supporting different controllers meant extra
work for each game.


- Improved joystick/controller support

Joystick buttons and axes can be assigned like keys from the setup
program. In addition, UI functions (such as menus) can now be
controlled entirely from game controllers or joysticks.


- Boss life meter

Whenever a boss is within earshot, a health meter will be drawn at the
top of the screen.


- Longer explosions

In the original Ken's Labyrinth, explosions were only drawn for one
frame. In LAB3D-SDL, frame rates are so high that explosions may not
be visible at all. Now, all explosions last for 1/15th of a second,
regardless of framerate.


- No clipping cheat

LSHIFT-RSHIFT-R (or CTRL-SHIFT-R) enables noclip mode, which allows
you to walk through walls.


- Fixed object disappearing

In the original, whenever you enter a cell, it's contents
disappear. This was probably done because objects looked crappy up
close with the software renderer; however, with trilinear filtering,
things look just fine up close.


- Anisotropic filtering option

Anisotropic filtering can be selected in the setup program.
